title: Philosophy of Pizza
author: Conroy
date: 1900/12/01

Pizza is not just a food: it's a way of life!

To some, pizza is just an easy and fun Saturday night meal. To others, it is a cultural icon. Yet very few realize that pizza is an artform: to make a good pizza is easy; to make a great pizza, repeatedly, consistently, takes a lifetime of dedication. When we think Pizza, we think of the regulars: cheese, pepperoni, meatlovers, veggie… and that’s about all you can get from a typical pizza joint. These examples only change the toppings: everything else stays the same. But in order to get creative about pizza, you have to think outside the box in the four different dimensions that define what pizza is:

###Crust

The foundation of a pizza is its crust: a platform on which to build the rest of the pizza. Crusts can come in different styles (e.g., thin crust, hand-tossed, or deep dish), but they are usually always the same white-bread recipe. Why? If we break outside of that mould, we can begin to think about using ingredients like corn tortillas, or potatoes, or even rice. As long as it provides the physical infrastructure necessary to hold the pizza together, and as long as it contributes in a positive way to the taste of the pizza, the possibilities for crusts are numerous.

###Sauce

The lifeblood of the pizza is its sauce. It provides the base-note flavor around which the rest of the pizza orbits. Unfortunately, sauce is usually just one of two things: red, tomatoe-based, or white, creame-based. Why? If think about sauce in a different way, we can start making sauces out of avocados, or mashed potatoes, or wasabi-mayonaise. As long as it provides a strong but subtle flavor, and a little bit of moisture, ideas for sauces can be borrowed and adapted from almost any dish around the world.

###Toppings

Toppings are the middle note to a pizza: the main focus of the taste profile. Toppings, out of all of the different dimensions, is the one that is relied on in mainstream pizza making in order to provide variety. Order a pizza off Dominos.com and you’ll see a couple dozen options, ranging from pepperoni to peppers; from onions to olives; from spinach to sardines. With PizzA Cupcaeks, the goal is to pair the right toppings with the right sauce. Sometimes, the line between sauce and toppings is blurred; if you think about something like a ceviche pizza, would the fish and vegetable mix be part of the sauce? or part of the toppings? The classification does not matter, as long as the two work together. 

###Garnish

You probably thought I was going to put “cheese” here, right? Because all pizzas have cheese, right? Not necessarily, and especially when someone is lactose intolerant or vegan. Cheese can actually switch between being a topping and a garnish, depending on the context and how heavily it’s featured. Doing a meatlovers pizza? The cheese is a garnish. Doing a 4 Cheese pizza? It’s a topping. Other garnishes include herbs, spices, and crèmes. As long as the garnish keeps quiet and helps the other dimensions, it’s doing it’s job.

